Introdução
==========

Apesar de suas divergências estéticas, modernistas e tradicionalistas
do final do século XIX até o início do XX tinham ao menos uma
posição em comum:
ambos grupos alegavam que faltava à arte e à arquitetura brasileiras
da segunda metade do século XIX um caráter devidamente nacional.

* * * * * * * * *

This postulate was partly refuted in Portuguese-language scholarship
published since the 1960s, exposing the persistence of colonial-era
patterns in the hinterland and, in a few cases, in urban settings.

* * * * * * * * *

Juntamente com a revisão e reabilitação da arte acadêmica e da
arquitetura eclética nas últimas duas a três décadas, todavia,
escamotearam-se os discursos que denegriam o século XIX. A presente
comunicação explora alguns discursos estabelecidos entre 1888 e 1930,
que abordem a questão de identificar o caráter nacional na arte do
século XIX. Para tanto, estudam-se textos de Gonzaga Duque, Monteiro
Lobato, Adolfo Morales de los Ríos Filho, José Marianno Filho e Lucio
Costa, produzidos entre 1888 e 1943.

O discurso sobre o suposto desaparecimento do caráter nacional na
arquitetura será inicialmente explicitado, por meio da seleção de
textos canônicos e influentes no discurso do período escolhido.
Em seguida, indaga-se de que modo autores tanto tradicionalistas
quanto modernos aferiram a "brasilidade" da arte nacional após o fim
do ciclo do ouro, de modo a decretar seu óbito prematuro.
Explora-se, sucintamente, o conhecimento e a ignorância desses autores
a respeito de manifestações arquitetônicas tradicionais fora dos dois
principais centros de difusão dos discursos eruditos --- Rio de
Janeiro e São Paulo.
A partir dessa revisão, elabora-se um ensaio de panorama da visão da
arte tradicional brasileira do século XIX comum a discursos
tradicionalistas e modernistas.

* * * * * * * * *

The discourse on the lack of national character put forward in these
narratives stems both from well-documented aesthetic agendas advanced
by these authors, and from the less frequently acknowledged difficulty
in dating Brazilian vernacular architecture due to its marked
continuity and stability. This brings attention to the matter of how
canonical examples of Brazilian art and architecture were
cherry-picked, then oftentimes tampered with, to conform to certain
expectations regarding national character. The authors' aesthetic
movements are less relevant to how each addressed the matter of
Brazilianness in art, than is their understanding of the nature of
artistic and building professions.

Brazil in the 1880s was an empire ruled by landed elites from the
Northeast and, to a lesser degree, wealthy merchants from Rio. The
only monarchy among the republics of the American continent, she owed
this peculiar situation to the historic roots of independence. Brazil
had been a Portuguese colony from 1500 until 1808. In that year, the
Portuguese Crown, fleeing the Napoleonic invasion, relocated to its
colony, making Rio de Janeiro the seat of the Portuguese Empire.
King D. João VI strove to turn the city into a proper European
capital, and thus it came to be that a group of French artists, purged
in the Restoration, made their way to Rio, later to create the
Imperial Academy of Fine Arts on the model of its Parisian namesake.
Imbued with such civilizing mission, it is no wonder that these
artists had no knowledge of, and little interest in, Brazil's artistic
and architectural past. Outside Rio, however, art and architecture
were only marginally influenced by the academic novelties for most of
the nineteenth century.

The period of our study corresponds to the transition, in Brazil, from
the old imperial gentry to rule by another rural elite in the
Southeast, and then to the hegemony of industrial capitalism. It also
covers the decline of the Imperial Fine Arts Academy, later National
School of Fine Arts. In a curious amalgam of echoes from European
artistic movements, the *Salons* of Fine Arts in Rio during the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries were dominated by Romantic
and Impressionist painting, and Neoclassical sculpture. Urban growth
and renewal displayed eclectic styles of architecture of mostly
French, British and Italian influence, happily mixed and matched until
the 1910s, when the moralist traditional or neocolonial movement began
to set the tone of architectural debate.
