Tradition and the Professional Architect
========================================

The onset of the Modern movement in Brazilian architecture thus
entailed a power struggle between the proponents of the neocolonial
movement and their younger rivals. Both camps deployed the same
narrative regarding the development of national character in order to
promote opposing views of architectural style and space, and both
derided their rival as being so beneath them, it was
"non-architecture". In the meantime, a single dissonant chord struck
the debate in Rio during that time. It was Adolfo Morales de los Ríos
Filho's book *Grandjean de Montigny e a evolução da arte brasileira*
(Grandjean de Montigny and the Evolution of Brazilian Art, 1941). In
this work, Morales de los Ríos (1887--1973), director of the National
Fine Arts School,went back to the later Gonzaga Duque's positive view
of early-nineteenth-century French influence on Brazilian art. The
argument was similar:

> Yes, it dignified Brazilian art, fighting the neglect and ignorance
> of a fledgling society, .\ .\ .\ . and contributing to the
> foundation of an art school, where it would have been difficult to
> create it using existing [local] resources.
> [@morales:1941grandjean, p. 157]

Despite being part of the architectural establishment, as director of
the most important fine arts school in the nation, Morales de los Ríos
had his own axe to grind as well. The Beaux-Arts method had been under
critical fire for well over two decades, first from the traditionalist
movement, then from the modernists. The National Fine Arts School was
somewhat open, nevertheless, to the teaching of neocolonial
architecture in the 1920s, although it was considered but one of
several eclectic styles happily used and mixed by students and
teachers. Lucio Costa himself, owing to political connections, had
seized the school directorship for a few months in 1931, before being
ousted by the professors. Moreover, urban renewal in Rio, exacerbated
since 1920, was threatening the nineteenth-century French-inspired
heritage just as much as the monuments of the colonial period.

Morales de los Ríos's arguments, however, were of an obviously
different nature that those of the neocolonial-modernist groups.
Unlike the neocolonial or modernist mavericks, he was directly
implicated in the education of a class of elite artists expected to
succeed in both public and private commissions. Thus, he defended not
only the historical roots of his school, but also the diversity and
adaptability of architects in a time of rapidly changing tastes among
the public, particularly so in a moment when support for the
neocolonial style in major works had all but disappeared.
Also, the Pan-American ideology of the first three decades of the
twentieth century, which had underwritten neocolonial architecture
throughout the continent, had been replaced by introverted populism in
Brazil's fascist government led by Getúlio Vargas. Paradoxically, this
introversion was deleterious for the traditional art movement, as it
made Brazilians look away from the art of the American continent and
towards the more conventional artistic centers of Europe. Public
architecture in the Vargas régime oscillated between the stripped
classicism then popular in most European countries, and modernism,
which was being half-heartedly supported by fascist Italy at the same
time. As for the fickle bourgeois of São Paulo, they moved on to favor
variations on Art Déco, Italian rationalism, and whitewashed
modernism.

Both Ricardo Severo and José Mariano Filho, on the other hand, had
advocated a sort of sociological collectivism in the architectural
profession. Severo, a republican activist who at first moved to Brazil
to avoid political persecution, expected architecture and architects
to play a role in the forging of a modern---meaning
nationalist---state, conscious and proud of its ethnic origins
[@mello:2007ricardo, p. 29] He sought to balance his archaeological
interests, which led him to favor a structuralist cohesion of sorts
between a centuries-old culture and its present developments, and his
practice as an architect, where he ultimately gave in to the public
expectations of wholly modernized, eclectic plans and picturesque
massing. Nevertheless, he was successful in fostering public taste for
such traditional Brazilian elements as the seventeenth-century
*alpendres* (deep and wide colonnaded porches) and generous roof
overhangs. These features went on to become favorites of Brazilian
single-family houses throughout the twentieth century.

As for Mariano, a scion of the landed elite of the Brazilian
Northeast, architecture was a dilettante passion as much as a
political cause. Free from the need to make a living out of the
profession, he was thus little interested in matters of professional
cohesion and construction industry. Conversely, with his disposable
income, he was able to fund a considerable documentation effort, as
well as publicity stunts in the form of design competitions. In
addition to this, he was a regular contributor to the Rio press
throughout the 1930s. As the prestige of neocolonial architecture for
major public works eroded during that decade, his criticism of the
Modern movement increasingly resorted to the sort of racial and
political slander expected to appeal to the heads of the fascist
government: "architectural Judaism" and "communist architecture" were
expressions used in his later writings, [@mariannofilho:1943margem, p. 41] as
well as attacks on artistic "freemasonry."

Both because of his early years in the neocolonial movement, and in
reaction to Mariano's criticism of modern architecture, Lucio Costa,
too, resorted to an ethnic narrative regarding the roots of national
artistic character. As a pure-bred white Brazilian of colonial
Portuguese descent, the son of a Navy officer, he was in as strong a
position as Mariano to claim authority to speak for national roots.
Moreover, his political connections in the Vargas government freed him
from the concern with day-to-day professional practice in a market
environment. Costa at first supported Mariano's narrative of a
collective, anonymous architecture without architects, even through
his first decade as a leader of the Modern movement in Brazil. This
led him to shun at first the few known masters of Brazilian art in the
colonial period. By 1945, however, his writings focused chiefly on
self-conscious artistic intent and the importance of individual genius
for the development of style. A hinge moment in his views probably
occurred around 1939, when he supported Oscar Niemeyer's attempt to
insert a modernist hotel at the heart of the historic district in Ouro
Preto, although influence from poets Mário de Andrade and Carlos
Drummond de Andrade in the SPHAN is not to be excluded. Costa then
moved away from the ethnological understanding of architectural
coherence, to argue that an architectural work of art "shall not
resent the proximity to other works of art" [quoted in @comas:2010passado]
Throughout the remainder of his long writing career, he strove to
reconcile both views as the discourses on the artistic originality of
the Modern movement became hegemonic. The unchallenged ethos of
national genius that Costa helped construct for Niemeyer remains to
this day a favorite topic of debate regarding the nature of
professional practice in Brazilian architecture.

